Inter-RAT handover (E-UTRAN to UTRAN)
Computer Networks module - LTE assignment
Michele Zanotti
Spring term 2018

1

Computer Networks

1

LTE assignment

Introduction

The intra-RAT handover from E-UTRAN to UTRAN is composed of two
phases: the preparation phase and the execution phase. Both the phases
involve either LTE nodes and UMTS node. In particular, the LTE nodes
involved are the eNodeB, E-UTRAN, and the MME, the S-GW and the PGW. The first cited node belongs to the E-UTRAN while the others belong
to the core network. The UMTS nodes are instead the RNC, the SGSN,

Figure 1: Architecture referece model (non-roaming architecture for 3GPP
accesses)

2

Computer Networks

2

LTE assignment

Preparation phase

Figure 2: the flow of the messages and the nodes involved in the handover
preparation phase
1) The source eNodeB decides to initiate an Inter-RAT handover to the
target access network.
Note that at this point both uplink and downlink user data is transmitted through:
– Bearer(s) between UE and source eNodeB
– GTP1 tunnel(s) between source eNodeB, Serving GW and PDN
GW.
2) The source eNodeB sends a Handover Required message to the source
MME, requesting the CN to establish resources in the target RNC,
target SGSN and the Serving GW. The message is sent through the S1
interface and it contains the following parameters:
1

GPRS Tunneling protocol (GTP) is a IP/UDP based protocol used to encapsulate user
data when passing through core network (GTP-U) or to carry bearer specific signalling
traffic between various core network nodes (GTP-C).

3

Computer Networks

LTE assignment

– S1AP Cause: it specifies the reason of the message
– Target RNC Identifier: it identifies the target RNC
– CSG access mode: included only if the target cell is a hybrid cell
– CSG ID: included only if the target cell is a CSG2 or hybrid cell,
it identifies the cell
– Source to Target Transparent Container: it carries RRC parameters and Radio Bearer information
3) The source MME determines from the “Target RNC Identifier” field
that the type of handover is intra-RAT Handover to UTRAN Iu mode
and, if the CSG ID is included in the message, it checks the UE’s
CSG subscribtion. If the UE isn’t subscribed to the CSG, then the
MME rejects the handover, unless the UE has emergency bearer services ongoing (in this case the handover to the target RNC is performed
independent of the restrictions). If the handover isn’t rejected then the
MME selects the target SGSN and sends to it a Forward Relocation
Request message through the S3 interface. Some of the parameters
included in this message are:
– user IMSI
– ISR Supported: it indicates if the source MME and the source
S-GW are able to activate ISR3
– PDN connections: it indicates the active PDN connections
– RAN cause: it’s the S1AP cause received from the eNodeB
– CSG ID: included only if the target cell is a CSG cell or a hybrid
cell
– CSG Membership Indication: it indicates if the UE is a CSG
member. It’s included only if the target cell is a hybrid cell or if
it is a CSG cell and there is at least one emergency bearer service
– MM context: it includes information on the EPS Bearer contexts
– Source to Target Transparent Container
If none of the UE’s EPS Bearers is supported by the target SGSN,
the source MME rejects the handover attempt and sends a Handover
Preparation Failure message to the Source eNodeB.
2

CSG = closed subscriber group of a home eNodeB
ISR = “idle mode signalling reduction”. When this mode is active the network can
simultaneously register the UE in a routing area that is served by an SGSN and in one or
more tracking areas that are served by an MME.
3

4

Computer Networks

LTE assignment

4) The target SGSN determines if the S-GW has to be relocated. If so,
it selects the target S-GW and sends to it a Create Session Request
message per each PDN connection.
After that, the target SGSN establishes the EPS Bearer contexts indicated by the message received from the MME and deactivates the
Bearer contexts which can’t be estabilished.
4a) The target Serving GW allocates its local resources and returns a
Create Session Response to the target SGSN.
5) The target SGSN requests the target RNC to establish the radio network resources (radio access beares - RABs) by sending the Relocation
Request message through the Iu-PS interface. Some of the parameters
included in this message are:
– Encryption information: it is sent in order to allow data transfer
to continue in the new UTRAN target cell without requiring a
new Authentication and Key Agreement (AKA) procedure
– RAB to be setup list: for each RAB to be set up it contains
information such as the RAB ID and other RAB parameters
– CSG ID and CSG Membership Indication: included only when
provided by the the source MME in the Forward Relocation
Request message
– Source RNC to Target RNC Transparent Container: it includes
the information received from the source eNodeB included in the
Source to Target Transparent Container field of the Handover
required message
If the target cell is a CSG cell, the target RNC verifies the CSG ID provided by the target SGSN and rejects the handover if it does not match
the CSG ID for the target cell. If the CSG Membership Indication is
”non member”, the target RNC only accepts emergency bearers.
5a) For each accepted bearer, the target RNC allocates radio and Iu user
plane resources. After that, the target RNC sends back to the SGSN
the Relocation Request Acknowledge messages, which contains a list
of the setup bearers and a list of the failed to setup bearers, which will
be deactivated by the SGSN.
After sending the ACK the RNC is prepared to receive downlink GPRS

5

Computer Networks

LTE assignment

Tunnelling Protocol PDUs4 (GTP PDUs) from the S-GW (or from the
target SGSN if Direct Tunnel is not used) for the accepted bearers.

4

Packets received by a protocol layer are called Service Data Unit (SDU) while packets
output of a layer are called Protocol Data Unit (PDU).

6

Computer Networks

LTE assignment

References

7

